Erewhon, Or, Over the Range – Samuel Butler

The Story So Far: 

An intrepid traveller has discovered the untouched land of Erewhon. During his visit to the land’s Colleges of Unreason, he is provided a copy of ‘The Book of Machines’. Five hundred years earlier, the book’s controversial subject, the relationship between man and machine, provoked a civil war.
 
Now Read On:

The writer commences:--"There was a time, when the earth was to all
appearance utterly destitute both of animal and vegetable life, and when
according to the opinion of our best philosophers it was simply a hot
round ball with a crust gradually cooling.  Now if a human being had
existed while the earth was in this state and had been allowed to see it
as though it were some other world with which he had no concern, and if
at the same time he were entirely ignorant of all physical science, would
he not have pronounced it impossible that creatures possessed of anything
like consciousness should be evolved from the seeming cinder which he was
beholding?  Would he not have denied that it contained any potentiality
of consciousness?  Yet in the course of time consciousness came.  Is it
not possible then that there may be even yet new channels dug out for
consciousness, though we can detect no signs of them at present?

"Again.  Consciousness, in anything like the present acceptation of the
term, having been once a new thing--a thing, as far as we can see,
subsequent even to an individual centre of action and to a reproductive
system (which we see existing in plants without apparent
consciousness)--why may not there arise some new phase of mind which
shall be as different from all present known phases, as the mind of
animals is from that of vegetables?

"It would be absurd to attempt to define such a mental state (or whatever
it may be called), inasmuch as it must be something so foreign to man
that his experience can give him no help towards conceiving its nature;
but surely when we reflect upon the manifold phases of life and
consciousness which have been evolved already, it would be rash to say
that no others can be developed, and that animal life is the end of all
things.  There was a time when fire was the end of all things: another
when rocks and water were so."

The writer, after enlarging on the above for several pages, proceeded to
inquire whether traces of the approach of such a new phase of life could
be perceived at present; whether we could see any tenements preparing
which might in a remote futurity be adapted for it; whether, in fact, the
primordial cell of such a kind of life could be now detected upon earth.
In the course of his work he answered this question in the affirmative
and pointed to the higher machines.

"There is no security"--to quote his own words--"against the ultimate
development of mechanical consciousness, in the fact of machines
possessing little consciousness now.  A mollusc has not much
consciousness.  Reflect upon the extraordinary advance which machines
have made during the last few hundred years, and note how slowly the
animal and vegetable kingdoms are advancing.  The more highly organised
machines are creatures not so much of yesterday, as of the last five
minutes, so to speak, in comparison with past time.  Assume for the sake
of argument that conscious beings have existed for some twenty million
years: see what strides machines have made in the last thousand!  May not
the world last twenty million years longer?  If so, what will they not in
the end become?  Is it not safer to nip the mischief in the bud and to
forbid them further progress?

"But who can say that the vapour engine has not a kind of consciousness?
Where does consciousness begin, and where end?  Who can draw the line?
Who can draw any line?  Is not everything interwoven with everything?  Is
not machinery linked with animal life in an infinite variety of ways?  The
shell of a hen’s egg is made of a delicate white ware and is a machine as
much as an egg-cup is: the shell is a device for holding the egg, as much
as the egg-cup for holding the shell: both are phases of the same
function; the hen makes the shell in her inside, but it is pure pottery.
She makes her nest outside of herself for convenience’ sake, but the nest
is not more of a machine than the egg-shell is.  A ‘machine’ is only a
‘device.’"

Then returning to consciousness, and endeavouring to detect its earliest
manifestations, the writer continued:-

"There is a kind of plant that eats organic food with its flowers: when a
fly settles upon the blossom, the petals close upon it and hold it fast
till the plant has absorbed the insect into its system; but they will
close on nothing but what is good to eat; of a drop of rain or a piece of
stick they will take no notice.  Curious! that so unconscious a thing
should have such a keen eye to its own interest.  If this is
unconsciousness, where is the use of consciousness?

"Shall we say that the plant does not know what it is doing merely
because it has no eyes, or ears, or brains?  If we say that it acts
mechanically, and mechanically only, shall we not be forced to admit that
sundry other and apparently very deliberate actions are also mechanical?
If it seems to us that the plant kills and eats a fly mechanically, may
it not seem to the plant that a man must kill and eat a sheep
mechanically?

"But it may be said that the plant is void of reason, because the growth
of a plant is an involuntary growth.  Given earth, air, and due
temperature, the plant must grow: it is like a clock, which being once
wound up will go till it is stopped or run down: it is like the wind
blowing on the sails of a ship--the ship must go when the wind blows it.
But can a healthy boy help growing if he have good meat and drink and
clothing? can anything help going as long as it is wound up, or go on
after it is run down?  Is there not a winding up process everywhere?

"Even a potato {5} in a dark cellar has a certain low cunning about him
which serves him in excellent stead.  He knows perfectly well what he
wants and how to get it.  He sees the light coming from the cellar window
and sends his shoots crawling straight thereto: they will crawl along the
floor and up the wall and out at the cellar window; if there be a little
earth anywhere on the journey he will find it and use it for his own
ends.  What deliberation he may exercise in the matter of his roots when
he is planted in the earth is a thing unknown to us, but we can imagine
him saying, ‘I will have a tuber here and a tuber there, and I will suck
whatsoever advantage I can from all my surroundings.  This neighbour I
will overshadow, and that I will undermine; and what I can do shall be
the limit of what I will do.  He that is stronger and better placed than
I shall overcome me, and him that is weaker I will overcome.’

"The potato says these things by doing them, which is the best of
languages.  What is consciousness if this is not consciousness?  We find
it difficult to sympathise with the emotions of a potato; so we do with
those of an oyster.  Neither of these things makes a noise on being
boiled or opened, and noise appeals to us more strongly than anything
else, because we make so much about our own sufferings.  Since, then,
they do not annoy us by any expression of pain we call them emotionless;
and so _qua_ mankind they are; but mankind is not everybody.