Roman Fever -- Edith Wharton  The Story So Far:  Two old friends, Grace Ansley and Alida Slade, are visiting Rome with their daughters, Barbara Ansley and Jenny Slade. While chatting at a restaurant with a view of Roman ruins, Alida decides to unveil a secret from their youth. 

Now Read On:

For a long time they continued to sit side by side without speaking. It seemed as though, to both, there was a relief in laying down their somewhat futile activities in the presence of the vast Memento Mori which faced them. Mrs. Slade sat quite still, her eyes fixed on the golden slope of the Palace of the Caesars, and after a while Mrs. Ansley ceased to fidget with her bag, and she too sank into meditation. Like many intimate friends, the two ladies had never before had occasion to be silent together, and Mrs. Ansley was slightly embarrassed by what seemed, after so many years, a new stage in their intimacy, and one which which she did not yet know how to deal.
Suddenly the air was full of that deep clangour of bells which periodically covers Rome with a roof of silver. Mrs. Slade glanced at her wrist-watch. "Five o’clock already," she said, as though surprised.
Mrs. Ansley suggested interrogatively: "There’s bridge at the Embassy at five." For a long time Mrs. Slade did not answer. She appeared to be lost in contemplation, and Mrs. Ansley thought the remark had escaped her. But after a while she said, as if speaking out of a dream: "Bridge, did you say? Not unless you want to  . . . But I don’t think I will, you know."
"Oh, no," Mrs Ansley hastened to assure her. "I don’t care to at all. It’s so lovely here; and so full of old memories, as you say." She settled herself in her chair, and almost furtively drew forth her knitting. Mrs. Slade took sideway note of this activity, but her own beautifully cared-for hands remained motionless on her knee. 
"I was just thinking," she said slowly, "what different things things Rome stands for to each generation of travellers. To our grandmothers, Roman fever; to our mothers, sentimental dangers--how we used to be guarded!--to our daughters, no more dangers than the middle of Main Street. They didn’t know it--but how much they’re missing!" 
The long golden light was beginning to pale, and Mrs. Ansley lifted her knitting a little closer to her eyes. "Yes; how we were guarded!"
"I always used to think," Mrs. Slade continued, that our mothers had a much more difficult job than our grandmothers. When Roman fever stalked the streets it must have been comparatively easy to gather in the girls at the danger hour; but when you and I were young, with such beauty calling us, and the spice of disobedience thrown in, and no worse risk than catching cold during the cool hour after sunset, the mothers used to be put it to keep us--didn’t they?"
She turned again toward Mrs. Ansley, but the latter had reached a delicate point in her knitting. "One, two, three--slip two; yes, they must have been," she assented, without looking up.
Mrs. Slade’s eyes rested on her with deepened attention. "She can knit--in the face of this! How like her . . ."
Mrs. Slade leaned back, brooding, her eyes ranging from the ruins which faced her to the long green hollow of the Forum, the fading flow of the church fronts beyond it, and the outlying immensity of the Colosseum. Suddenly she thought: "It’s all very well to say that our girls have done away with sentiment and moonlight. But if Babs Ansley isn’t out to catch that young aviator--the one who’s a Marchese--then I don’t know anything. And Jenny has no chance beside her. I know that too. I wonder if that’s why Grace Ansley like the two girls to go everywhere together? My poor Jenny as a foil--!" Mrs. Slade gave a hardly audible laugh, and at the sound Mrs. Ansley dropped her knitting.
"Yes--?"
"I--oh, nothing. I was only thinking your Babs carries everything before her. That Campolieri boy is one of the best matches in Rome. Don’t look so innocent, my dear--you know he is. And I was wondering, ever so respectfully, you understand . . . wondering how two such exemplary characters as you and Horace had managed to produce anything quite so dynamic." Mrs. Slade laughed again, with a touch of asperity.
Mrs. Ansley’s hands lay inert across her needles. She looked straight out at the great accumulated wreckage of passion and splendour at her feet. But her small profile was almost expressionless. At length she said: "I think your overrate Babs, my dear." 
Mrs. Slade’s tone grew easier. "No; I don’t. I appreciate her. And perhaps envy you. Oh, my girl’s perfect; if I were a chronic invalid I’d--well, I think I’d rather be in Jenny’s hands. There must be times . . . but there! I always wanted a brilliant daughter . . .  and never quite understood why I got an angel instead." 
Mrs. Ansley echoed her laugh in a faint murmur. "Babs is an angel too." 
"Of course--of course! But she’s got rainbow wings. Well, they’re wandering by the sea with their young men; and here we sit . . . and it all brings back the past a little too acutely."
Mrs. Ansley had resumed her knitting. One might almost have imagined (if one had known her less well, Mrs. Slade reflected) that, for her also, too many memories rose from the lengthening shadows of those august ruins. But no; she was simply absorbed in her work. What was there for her to worry about? She knew that Babes would almost certainly come back engaged to the extremely eligible Campolieri. "And she’ll see the New York house, and settle down near them in Rome, and never be in their way . . . she’s much too tactful. But she’ll have an excellent cook, and just the right people in for bridge and cocktails . . . and a perfectly peaceful old age among her grandchildren."
Mrs. Slade broke off this prophetic flight with a recoil of self-disgust. There was no one of whom she had less right to think unkindly than of Grace Ansley. Would she never cure herself o envying her? Perhaps she had begun too long ago.
She stood up and leaned against the parapet, filling her troubled eyes with the tranquilizing magic of the hour. But instead of tranquilizing her the sight seemed to increase her exasperation. Her gaze turned toward the Colosseum. Already its golden flank was drowned in purple shadow, and above it the sky curved crystal clear, without light or colour. It was the moment when afternoon and evening hang balanced in mid-heaven.
Mrs. Slade turned back and laid her hand on her friend’s arm. The gesture was so abrupt that Mrs. Ansley looked up, startled.
"The sun’s set. You’re not afraid, my dear?"
"Afraid--"
"Of Roman fever or pneumonia? I remember how ill you were that winter. As a girl you had a very delicate throat, hadn’t you?"
"Oh, we’re all right up here. Down below, in the Forum, it does get deathly cold, all of a sudden . . . but not here."
"Ah, so of course you know because you had to be so careful." Mrs. Slade turned back to the parapet. She thought: "I must make one more effort not to hate her." Aloud she said: "Whenever I look at the Forum from up here, I remember that story about a great-aunt of yours, wasn’t she? A dreadfully wicked great-aunt?"
"Oh, yes; Great-aunt Harriet. The one who was supposed to have sent her young sister out to the Forum after sunset to gather a night-blooming flower for her album. All our great-aunts and grand-mothers used to have albums of dried flowers."
Mrs. Slade nodded. "But she really sent her because they were in love with the same man--"
"Well, that was the family tradition. They said Aunt Harriet confessed it years afterward. At any rate, the poor little sister caught the fever and died. Mother used to frighten us with the story when we were children." 
"And you frightened me with it, that winter when you and I were here as girls. The winter I was engaged to Delphin."
Mrs. Ansley gave a faint laugh. "Oh, did I? Really frightened you? I don’t believe you’re easily frightened."
"Not often; but I was then. I was easily frightened because I was too happy. I wonder if you know what that means?"
"I--yes . . ." Mrs. Ansley faltered.
"Well, I suppose that was why the story of your wicked aunt made such an impression on me. And I thought: ‘There’s no more Roman fever, but the Forum is deathly cold after sunset--especially after a hot day. And the Colosseum’s even colder and damper.’"
"The Colosseum--?"
"Yes. It wasn’t easy to get in, after the gates were locked for the night. Far from easy. Still, in those days it could be managed; it was managed, often. Lovers met there who couldn’t meet elsewhere. You knew that?" 
"I daresay. I don’t remember." 
"You don’t remember? You don’t remember going to visit some ruins or other one evening, just after dark, and catching a bad chill? You were supposed to have gone to see the moon rise. People always said that expedition was what caused your illness." 
There was a moment’s silence. 
