Great Expectations -- Charles Dickens

The Story So Far:

Pip, a young orphan living miserably with his aunt and uncle, is visiting the graveyard where his parents are buried, near the marshes and the open sea, in the dead of night. Pip is crying by the gravestones when suddenly, a wild and menacing man looms up beside him out of the darkness—an escaped convict who demands Pip’s help in getting rid of the chain around his leg.

Now Read On:

‘Hold your noise!’ cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from among the graves at the side of the church porch. ‘Keep still, you little devil, or I’ll cut your throat!’
A fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. A man with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round his head. A man who had been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung by nettles, and torn by briars; who limped and shivered, and glared and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me by the chin.
‘O! Don’t cut my throat, sir,’ I pleaded in terror. ‘Pray don’t do it, sir.’
‘Tell us your name!’ said the man. ‘Quick!’
‘Pip, sir.’
‘Once more,’ said the man, staring at me. ‘Give it mouth!’
‘Pip. Pip, sir.’
‘Show us where you live,’ said the man. ‘Point out the place!’
I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the alder trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and emptied my pockets. There was nothing in them but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself—for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my feet—when the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tombstone, trembling, while he ate the bread ravenously.
‘You young dog,’ said the man, licking his lips, ‘what fat cheeks you ha’ got.’
I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized, for my years, and not strong.
‘Darn Me if I couldn’t eat ‘em,’ said the man, with a threatening shake of his head, ‘and if I han’t half a mind to’t!’ 
I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn’t, and held tighter to the tombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon it; partly, to keep myself from crying.
‘Now lookee here!’ said the man. ‘Where’s your mother?’
‘There, sir!’ said I.
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.
‘There, sir!’ I timidly explained. ‘Georgiana. That’s my mother.’
‘Oh!’ said he, coming back. ‘And is that your father alonger your mother?’
‘Yes, sir,’ said I; ‘him too; late of this parish.’
‘Ha!’ he muttered then, considering. ‘Who d’ye live with—supposin’ you’re kindly let to live, which I han’t made up my mind about?’
‘My sister, sir—Mrs Joe Gargery—wife of Joe Gargery, the blacksmith, sir.’ ‘Blacksmith, eh?’ said he. And looked down at his leg. After darkly looking at his leg and at me several times, he came closer to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as far as he could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked most helplessly up into his.
‘Now lookee here,’ he said, ‘the question being whether you’re to be let to live. You know what a file is?’
‘Yes, sir.’ 
‘And you know what whittles* is?’
‘Yes, sir.’ 
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger.
‘You get me a file.’ He tilted me again. ‘And you get me whittles.’ He tilted me again. ‘You bring ‘em both to me.’ He tilted me again. ‘Or I’ll have your heart and liver out.’ He tilted me again.
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands, and said, ‘If you would kindly please to let me keep upright, sir, perhaps I shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps I could attend more.’
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped over its own weather-cock. Then, he held me by the arms in an upright position on the top of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:
‘You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. You bring the lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder. You do it, and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such a person as me, or any person sumever [whatsoever], and you shall be let to live. You fail, or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out, roasted and ate. Now, I ain’t alone, as you may think I am. There’s a young man hid with me, in comparison with which young man I am a Angel. That young man hears the words I speak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar to himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver. It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself up, may draw the clothes over his head, may think himself comfortable and safe, but that young man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open. I am a keeping that young man from harming you at the present moment, with great difficulty. I find it wery hard to hold that young man off of your inside. Now, what do you say?’
I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him what broken bits of food I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in the morning.
‘Say, Lord strike you dead if you don’t!’ said the man.
I said so and he took me down.
‘Now,’ he pursued, ‘you remember what you’ve undertook, and you remember that young man, and you get home!’
‘Goo-good night, sir,’ I faltered.
‘Much of that!’ said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. ‘I wish I was a frog. Or a eel!’
At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms—clasping himself, as if to hold himself together—and limped towards the low church wall. As I saw him go, picking his way among the nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he looked in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in.  

*whittles:    victuals (food)

