The Woman at the Store -- Katherine Mansfield

The Story So Far:

Exhausted from riding horses on a hot day, Jo, Jim, and the narrator are invited to stay in the home of a hospitable, but severely disheveled woman. That night, she asks them to dine with her and her strange child.

Now Read On:

“Where’s your old man now?” asked Jim, slowly.
The woman blubbered and dropped her head on to the table. “Jim, ‘e’s gone shearin’ and left me alone again,” she wailed.
“‘Ere, look out for the glasses,” said Jo. “Cheer-o, ‘ave another drop. No good cryin’ over spilt ‘usbands! You Jim, you blasted cuckoo!”
“Mr. Jo,” said the woman, drying her eyes on her jacket frill, “you’re a gent, an’ if I was a secret woman, I’d place any confidence in your ‘ands. I don’t mind if I do ‘ave a glass on that.”
Every moment the lightning grew more vivid and the thunder sounded nearer. Jim and I were silent—the kid never moved from her bench. She poked her tongue out and blew on her paper as she drew.
“It’s the loneliness,” said the woman, addressing Jo—he made sheep’s eyes at her— “and bein’ shut up ‘ere like a broody ‘en.” He reached his hand across the table and held hers, and though the position looked most uncomfortable when they wanted to pass the water and whisky, their hands stuck together as though glued. I pushed back my chair and went over to the kid, who immediately sat flat down on her artistic achievements and made a face at me.
“You’re not to look,” said she.
“Oh, come on, don’t be nasty!” Jim came over to us, and we were just drunk enough to wheedle the kid into showing us. And those drawings of hers were extraordinary and repulsively vulgar. The creations of a lunatic with a lunatic’s cleverness. There was no doubt about it, the kid’s mind was diseased. While she showed them to us, she worked herself up into a mad excitement, laughing and trembling, and shooting out her arms.
“Mumma,” she yelled. “Now I’m going to draw them what you told me I never was to—now I am.”
The woman rushed from the table and beat the child’s head with the flat of her hand.
“I’ll smack you with yer clothes turned up if yer dare say that again,” she bawled.
Jo was too drunk to notice, but Jim caught her by the arm. The kid did not utter a cry. She drifted over to the window and began picking flies from the treacle paper.
We returned to the table—Jim and I sitting one side, the woman and Jo, touching shoulders, the other. We listened to the thunder, saying stupidly, “That was a near one,” “There it goes again,” and Jo, at a heavy hit, “Now we’re off,” “Steady on the brake,” until rain began to fall, sharp as cannon shot on the iron roof.
“You’d better doss here for the night,” said the woman.
“That’s right,” assented Jo, evidently in the know about this move.
“Bring up yer things from the tent. You two can doss in the store along with the kid—she’s used to sleep in there and won’t mind you.”
“Oh Mumma, I never did,” interrupted the kid.
“Shut yer lies! An’ Mr. Jo can ‘ave this room.”
It sounded a ridiculous arrangement, but it was useless to attempt to cross them, they were too far gone. While the woman sketched the plan of action, Jo sat, abnormally solemn and red, his eyes bulging, and pulling at his moustache.
“Give us a lantern,” said Jim, “I’ll go down to the paddock.” We two went together. Rain whipped in our faces, the land was light as though a bush fire was raging. We behaved like two children let loose in the thick of an adventure, laughed and shouted to each other, and came back to the whare to find the kid already bedded in the counter of the store.
The woman brought us a lamp. Jo took his bundle from Jim, the door was shut.
“Good-night all,” shouted Jo.
Jim and I sat on two sacks of potatoes. For the life of us we could not stop laughing. Strings of onions and half-hams dangled from the ceiling—wherever we looked there were advertisements for “Camp Coffee” and tinned meats. We pointed at them, tried to read them aloud—overcome with laughter and hiccoughs. The kid in the counter stared at us. She threw off her blanket and scrambled to the floor, where she stood in her grey flannel night-gown, rubbing one leg against the other. We paid no attention to her.
“Wot are you laughing at?” she said, uneasily.
“You!” shouted Jim. “The red tribe of you, my child.”
She flew into a rage and beat herself with her hands. “I won’t be laughed at, you curs—you.” He swooped down upon the child and swung her on to the counter.
“Go to sleep, Miss Smarty—or make a drawing—here’s a pencil—you can use Mumma’s account book.”
Through the rain we heard Jo creak over the boarding of the next room—the sound of a door being opened—then shut to.
“It’s the loneliness,” whispered Jim.
“One hundred and twenty-five different ways—alas! my poor brother!”
The kid tore out a page and flung it at me.
“There you are,” she said. “Now I done it ter spite Mumma for shutting me up ‘ere with you two. I done the one she told me I never ought to. I done the one she told me she’d shoot me if I did. Don’t care! Don’t care!”
The kid had drawn the picture of the woman shooting at a man with a rook rifle and then digging a hole to bury him in.
She jumped off the counter and squirmed about on the floor biting her nails.
Jim and I sat till dawn with the drawing beside us. The rain ceased, the little kid fell asleep, breathing loudly. We got up, stole out of the whare, down into the paddock. White clouds floated over a pink sky—a chill wind blew; the air smelled of wet grass. Just as we swung into the saddle Jo came out of the whare—he motioned to us to ride on.
“I’ll pick you up later,” he shouted.
A bend in the road, and the whole place disappeared.

