The Mystery of Edwin Drood -- Charles Dickens

The Story So Far:  One night, the cunning Mr. Jasper meets up with Durdles, the stonemason of Cloisterham, for a walk through the town’s cathedral. Durdles’s work has provided him with a number of things that Mr. Jasper might be interested in: sensitive information and the key to the crypt door. 

Now Read On:

They are to ascend the great Tower.  On the steps by which they rise to the Cathedral, Durdles pauses for new store of breath.  The steps are very dark, but out of the darkness they can see the lanes of light they have traversed.  Durdles seats himself upon a step.  Mr. Jasper seats himself upon another.  The odour from the wicker bottle (which has somehow passed into Durdles’s keeping) soon intimates that the cork has been taken out; but this is not ascertainable through the sense of sight, since neither can descry the other.  And yet, in talking, they turn to one another, as though their faces could commune together.
‘"This is good stuff, Mister Jarsper!"
"It is very good stuff, I hope.—I bought it on purpose."
‘They don’t show, you see, the old uns don’t, Mister Jarsper!’
"It would be a more confused world than it is, if they could."
"Well, it would lead towards a mixing of things,’ Durdles acquiesces: pausing on the remark, as if the idea of ghosts had not previously presented itself to him in a merely inconvenient light, domestically or chronologically.  "But do you think there may be Ghosts of other things, though not of men and women?"
"What things?  Flower-beds and watering-pots? horses and harness?"
"No.  Sounds."
"What sounds?"
"Cries."
"What cries do you mean?  Chairs to mend?"
"No.  I mean screeches.  Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Jarsper.  Wait a bit till I put the bottle right.’  Here the cork is evidently taken out again, and replaced again.  ’There!  Now it’s right!  This time last year, only a few days later, I happened to have been doing what was correct by the season, in the way of giving it the welcome it had a right to expect, when them town-boys set on me at their worst.  At length I gave ‘em the slip, and turned in here.  And here I fell asleep.  And what woke me?  The ghost of a cry.  The ghost of one terrific shriek, which shriek was followed by the ghost of the howl of a dog: a long, dismal, woeful howl, such as a dog gives when a person’s dead.  That was my last Christmas Eve."
"What do you mean?" is the very abrupt, and, one might say, fierce retort.
"I mean that I made inquiries everywhere about, and, that no living ears but mine heard either that cry or that howl.  So I say they was both ghosts; though why they came to me, I’ve never made out."
"I thought you were another kind of man,’ says Jasper, scornfully.
‘So I thought myself,’ answers Durdles with his usual composure; ‘and yet I was picked out for it."
Jasper had risen suddenly, when he asked him what he meant, and he now says, ‘Come; we shall freeze here; lead the way.’
Durdles complies, not over-steadily; opens the door at the top of the steps with the key he has already used; and so emerges on the Cathedral level, in a passage at the side of the chancel.  Here, the moonlight is so very bright again that the colours of the nearest stained-glass window are thrown upon their faces.  The appearance of the unconscious Durdles, holding the door open for his companion to follow, as if from the grave, is ghastly enough, with a purple hand across his face, and a yellow splash upon his brow; but he bears the close scrutiny of his companion in an insensible way, although it is prolonged while the latter fumbles among his pockets for a key confided to him that will open an iron gate, so to enable them to pass to the staircase of the great tower.
"That and the bottle are enough for you to carry,’ he says, giving it to Durdles; ‘hand your bundle to me; I am younger and longer-winded than you.’  Durdles hesitates for a moment between bundle and bottle; but gives the preference to the bottle as being by far the better company, and consigns the dry weight to his fellow-explorer."
Then they go up the winding staircase of the great tower, toilsomely, turning and turning, and lowering their heads to avoid the stairs above, or the rough stone pivot around which they twist.  Durdles has lighted his lantern, by drawing from the cold, hard wall a spark of that mysterious fire which lurks in everything, and, guided by this speck, they clamber up among the cobwebs and the dust.  Their way lies through strange places.  Twice or thrice they emerge into level, low-arched galleries, whence they can look down into the moon-lit nave; and where Durdles, waving his lantern, waves the dim angels’ heads upon the corbels of the roof, seeming to watch their progress.  Anon, they turn into narrower and steeper staircases, and the night-air begins to blow upon them, and the chirp of some startled jackdaw or frightened rook precedes the heavy beating of wings in a confined space, and the beating down of dust and straws upon their heads.  At last, leaving their light behind a stair—for it blows fresh up here—they look down on Cloisterham, fair to see in the moonlight: its ruined habitations and sanctuaries of the dead, at the tower’s base: its moss-softened red-tiled roofs and red-brick houses of the living, clustered beyond: its river winding down from the mist on the horizon, as though that were its source, and already heaving with a restless knowledge of its approach towards the sea.
Once again, an unaccountable expedition this!  Jasper (always moving softly with no visible reason) contemplates the scene, and especially that stillest part of it which the Cathedral overshadows.  But he contemplates Durdles quite as curiously, and Durdles is by times conscious of his watchful eyes.
Only by times, because Durdles is growing drowsy.  As aëronauts lighten the load they carry, when they wish to rise, similarly Durdles has lightened the wicker bottle in coming up.  Snatches of sleep surprise him on his legs, and stop him in his talk.  A mild fit of calenture seizes him, in which he deems that the ground so far below, is on a level with the tower, and would as lief walk off the tower into the air as not.  Such is his state when they begin to come down.  And as aëronauts make themselves heavier when they wish to descend, similarly Durdles charges himself with more liquid from the wicker bottle, that he may come down the better.
The iron gate attained and locked—but not before Durdles has tumbled twice, and cut an eyebrow open once—they descend into the crypt again, with the intent of issuing forth as they entered.  But, while returning among those lanes of light, Durdles becomes so very uncertain, both of foot and speech, that he half drops, half throws himself down, by one of the heavy pillars, scarcely less heavy than itself, and indistinctly appeals to his companion for forty winks of a second each.
‘If you will have it so, or must have it so,’ replies Jasper, ‘I’ll not leave you here.  Take them, while I walk to and fro.’
Durdles is asleep at once; and in his sleep he dreams a dream.
It is not much of a dream, considering the vast extent of the domains of dreamland, and their wonderful productions; it is only remarkable for being unusually restless and unusually real.  He dreams of lying there, asleep, and yet counting his companion’s footsteps as he walks to and fro.  He dreams that the footsteps die away into distance of time and of space, and that something touches him, and that something falls from his hand.  Then something clinks and gropes about, and he dreams that he is alone for so long a time, that the lanes of light take new directions as the moon advances in her course.  From succeeding unconsciousness he passes into a dream of slow uneasiness from cold; and painfully awakes to a perception of the lanes of light—really changed, much as he had dreamed—and Jasper walking among them, beating his hands and feet.
‘Holloa!’ Durdles cries out, unmeaningly alarmed.
‘Awake at last?’ says Jasper, coming up to him.  ’Do you know that your forties have stretched into thousands?’
‘No.’
‘They have though.’
‘What’s the time?’
‘Hark!  The bells are going in the Tower!’
They strike four quarters, and then the great bell strikes.
‘Two!’ cries Durdles, scrambling up; ‘why didn’t you try to wake me, Mister Jarsper?’
‘I did.  I might as well have tried to wake the dead—your own family of dead, up in the corner there.’
‘Did you touch me?’
‘Touch you!  Yes.  Shook you.’
As Durdles recalls that touching something in his dream, he looks down on the pavement, and sees the key of the crypt door lying close to where he himself lay.
‘I dropped you, did I?’ he says, picking it up, and recalling that part of his dream.  As he gathers himself up again into an upright position, or into a position as nearly upright as he ever maintains, he is again conscious of being watched by his companion.
‘Well?’ says Jasper, smiling, ‘are you quite ready?  Pray don’t hurry.’
‘Let me get my bundle right, Mister Jarsper, and I’m with you.’  As he ties it afresh, he is once more conscious that he is very narrowly observed.
‘What do you suspect me of, Mister Jarsper?’ he asks, with drunken displeasure.  ’Let them as has any suspicions of Durdles name ‘em.’
‘I’ve no suspicions of you, my good Mr. Durdles; but I have suspicions that my bottle was filled with something stiffer than either of us supposed.  And I also have suspicions,’ Jasper adds, taking it from the pavement and turning it bottom upwards, ‘that it’s empty.’
Durdles condescends to laugh at this.  Continuing to chuckle when his laugh is over, as though remonstrant with himself on his drinking powers, he rolls to the door and unlocks it.  They both pass out, and Durdles relocks it, and pockets his key.
‘A thousand thanks for a curious and interesting night,’ says Jasper, giving him his hand; ‘you can make your own way home?’
‘I should think so!’ answers Durdles.  ’If you was to offer Durdles the affront to show him his way home, he wouldn’t go home.
Durdles wouldn’t go home till morning;
And then Durdles wouldn’t go home,
Durdles wouldn’t.’  This with the utmost defiance.
‘Good-night, then.’
‘Good-night, Mister Jarsper.’
Each is turning his own way, when a sharp whistle rends the silence, and the jargon is yelped out:
Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten.
Widdy widdy wy!
Then—E—don’t—go—then—I—shy—
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!’
Instantly afterwards, a rapid fire of stones rattles at the Cathedral wall, and the hideous small boy is beheld opposite, dancing in the moonlight.
